---
timestamp: 1676062887
slug: training-2023
title: Bodyweight and kettlebell training
tags: [embodiment,sports,performance,learning]
---

Here are some of my thoughts regarding bodyweight training this spring.

## The exercises to focus on

What exercises are worthwhile? Should they...
- ...be fun to do?
- ...enhance my performance in other sports?
- ...improve my physique?
- etc.

I really don't know. I think for me it's probably a mix of the above, including the "etc.".

Next up: research what exercises/movements are generally recommended for:

- Pull-up bars
- Rings
- Handstands
- Push-ups
- Kettlebell
- Plyometrics/jumps

### Pull-ups

Besides the obvious pull-ups, what do I want to learn to do on pull-up bar?

- I'd like to be able to do a muscle-ups
- I'd like to be able to do 20 consecutive pull-ups
- I'd like to be able to do a back-lever
- 

### Rings

- Pull up
- Muscle up
- Knee tuck to invert
- Dips
- L-sit
- Support hold 
- 
### Handstands


### Push-ups


### Kettlebell


### Plyometric/jumps

Asking *the internet* which plyometric exercises...
- ...improve my running.
- ...improve my cycling.
- ...improve my weightlifting.

Results in the following list:

- Box jumps (or onto something else)
- Squat jumps
- Single-leg hops 
- Skipping drills ([this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hjvERAKbl_s&ab_channel=InspanningLoont))
- Hurdle hops
- Broad jumps
- Loopsprong ([this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=72orGQFxWhA&ab_channel=InspanningLoont))
- Depth jump (from an elevation)
- Straight leg bounds
-

## Divide the exercises through the week




## Mix things up

To make bodyweight training fun and effective, mix things up. 

Don't do the same amount of sets and reps every time you practice. Instead, alternate between workouts targeting slightly different strength and skill goals.

For example, splitting the week up as follows:

| Training 1                 | Training 2               | Training 3                          |
|----------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| 5 sets of RPE8 pull-ups    | Weighted chin-ups        | Hangboard training + static holds   |
| Handstands face-to-wall    | Handstand back-to-wall   | 1-handed handstands                 |
| 5 sets of RPE 8 dips       | Weighted dips            | 
