---
timestamp: 1677178725
title: React components for a Gatsby blog
slug: blog-with-gatsby
tags: [ development, gatsby, blog ]
---

## Components

### General

here are some common React components that can be useful for building a Gatsby blog based on MDX files:

1. MDXRenderer - This is a core component provided by Gatsby that is used to render MDX files. It allows you to use components and props within your MDX files and provides a way to customize the rendering process.
2. Layout - A layout component that provides a consistent layout for your blog pages. This can include things like a header, footer, navigation, and sidebar.
3. SEO - A component that provides search engine optimization for your blog pages. This can include meta tags, descriptions, and Open Graph data.
4. PostList - A component that displays a list of blog posts on a page. This component can be used on the homepage or an archive page.

```
<PostList tagFilter='true' search='false'></PostList>
``` 

5. Post - A component that displays a single blog post. This component can be used on individual post pages.
6. TagList - A component that displays a list of tags used on your blog posts. This can be used for tag filtering or to display a list of popular tags.
7. Tag - A component that displays a single tag. This component can be used to display a tag on a blog post or to link to a list of posts with that tag.
8. CommentSection - A component that provides a comment section for your blog posts. This can include integration with third-party commenting systems like Disqus or Facebook Comments.
1. ShareButtons - A component that provides social sharing buttons for your blog posts. This can include buttons for Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and other social networks.
2.  NewsletterSignup - A component that provides a form for users to sign up for your blog's newsletter.


### GitHub flavored markdown

Add support for GFM: https://www.gatsbyjs.com/plugins/gatsby-plugin-mdx/#mdxoptions

To use Markdown-based:
- Autolinks
- Footnotes
- Strikethrough
- Task list



### Page specific



##

What different types of layouts should I create? A layout file contains a [template](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/plugins/gatsby-mdx-fix/#default-layouts) to process the MDX in a specific way. The layout can be specified from the template. 


## Other

### ZSH alias `note`.

- Currently, creates a file named the current timestamp, populates some front matter and opens the file in Vim. 
- Could, do the above and also automatically create a Git branch to merge into remote master. This way every note is automatically published.

