---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-05-23"
lecture nr: [13]
urse: Applied statistics
title: "Lecture 13"
slug: "statistics-13"
---

## Assignment 3

### Question 2

Formulate a research question. Express this as:
- How much
- To what extent

Identify the measure that's most relevant in answering the research question.

To compare generic to brand chocolate:

1. Estimate the mean difference and calculate a CI for the mean difference.
2. Ensure the assumptions for calculating the CI aren't violated.

I need the pooled SD, which I can get using the ANOVA test.

This is an independent group design. In an independent group design, the scores are described individually. 

What are typical scores? How much do they differ? Do they follow normal distributions? 

The means are relatively close to the medians. This tells us how typical the typical score is. We choose to base our analyses on the mean, because there are more analyses available for the mean. 

Dependent variable(s) in rows, independent variable(s) in column.

When reporting a mean score, also mention the SD (between parentheses).

Contrast analysis: a comparison of means. (Is that really all it is?). The maximum amount of planned contrasts you can do is k-1. When there are three groups, compare two.

The ANOVA test gives a standardized effect size difference CI. To get an unstandardized effect size difference CI, use the ESCI module, which provides a 95% CI interval for mean differences. 

> What are alternative contrasts?

Omnibus test of the null-hypothesis that all population means are equal. 
