---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-02-06"
lecture nr: [1,2]
course: Methods
title: "Chapter 1 — Thinking like a scientist"
slug: "methods-1"
---

import AnchorHeading from ""

<details>
<summary>Course details</summary>

Professors:
- Meike de Boer
- Robert Prettner

Course form:
- Lectures on Monday and Tuesday (15:30 — 17:15)
- Question hour every Friday (11:00 — 12:00)
- Assignments in week 4,5 and 6

Course material:
- Jackson, S.L. Research methods: a modular approach (third edition).
  - [Second edition](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf)

The exam cosisits of 40 multiple choice questions and lasts 90 minutes.

See also:
- [Course manual — Methods](/text-mining/methods/CourseManualMethods.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 1](/text-mining/methods/Lecture1.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 2](/text-mining/methods/Lecture2.pdf)

</details>

## Module 1

[anchor-heading children="test children" level="2" id="test-id"]

- How does science compare to other ways of acquiring knowledge?

How do we know what we know?
- **Superstition** and **intuition**: knowledge is gained through subjective feelings, belief in chance, or belief in magical events. Or in the case of intuition,  knowledge of something without being consciously aware of where it came from.
- **Authority**: trust in the source
- **Tenacity** (vasthoudendheid): repetition
- **Rationalism**: knowledge is gained through logical reasoning.
- **Empiricism**: knowledge is gained through objective observations of phenomena in the real world. We use our senses and intstruments that enhance the senses.
- **Science**: knowledge is gained through a combination of empiricism and rationalism. Three important aspects of scientific research are:
  1. Theory
  2. Conllecting data
  3.  Data analysis


### Ordinary human inquiry

Trial and error. Learning from experience. Humans detect causal patterns.

1. We prefer stories to statistics
2. We seek to confirm, not to question our ideas.
3. We rarely appreciate the role of chance and coincidence in shaping events
4. We sometimes misperceive the world around us.
5. We tend to oversimplify our thinking
6. We have faulty memories.

### Scientific thinking

1. Anecdotes are not data (nor evidence).
2. Science tries to falsify.
3. Science explicitly investigates the role of chance and coincidence in a study.
4. Studies are replicated, in the hope that this will prevent perceptual error.
5. Ultimately, it is empirical evidence that counts.

### Criteria of science

Science is determined by the *method*, not the subject matter.

There are three criteria for science:

**1. Systematic empiricism**: observation alone doesn't lead to scientific knowledge. Observations must be done in a structured and systematic way (in part to prevent biases).

**2. Public verification**: presenting research to the public for observation, replication, critique and testing.
The purpose of public verification is **veracity** of a theory.

**3. Empirically solvable problems**: science focuses on problems that are empirically solvable. Meaning they're answerable by currently available research techniques. 
Principles of falsifiability: a theory should be stated in such a way that it is possible to refute or disconfirm it.
The purpose of falsifiability is to determine whether a theory can potentially be tested.

### Testability of a theory

The following statements can't be tested:
- Speculative statements
- Normative statements
- Definitions
- Statements referring to unclear place or time

### Thinking like a scientist (Kida)

Thomas Kida (2006, p. 53). Evaluating a claim
1. Formulate the claim.
2. Evaluate the evidence for the claim.
3. Consider alternative explanations (hypotheses).
4. Evaluate the reasonableness of each of these explanations (hypotheses).

### Two forms of reasoning

Science combines *empiricism* and *rationalism*. There are two kinds of logical reasoning:
1. Induction
2. Deduction

#### Deductive scientific method

Main characteristics of deduction:
- **Validity**: Whether the reasoning is valid.
- **Soundness**: Whether the reasoning is valid **and** the premises are true.

The process of scientific dedecution is as follows:

1. There is an interest
2. Based on the interest, you form a research question
3. Based on the research question, you formulate a theoretical expectation
4. Operationalization: you translate the theoretical expectation into a testable hypothesis
5. You test 

Deductive argument forms:
- [Modus Ponens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modus_ponens)
- [Modus Tollens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modus_tollens)

#### Inductive scientific method

Inductive reasoning is *strong* if the premises make the conclusion plausible (and weak it not).

Inductive reasoning is *cogent* if:
1. It is strong.
2. Its premises are true.

(Parallel to validity and soundness)

## Module 2

A research article consists of:
- **Introduction**: contains *what* (problem definition) is studied and *why* (research goal).
- **Method**: contains *how* study is performed.

There are multiple kinds of research methods:
1. [Descriptive](#1-descriptive-methods)
2. Predictive
3. Explanatory

### 1. Descriptive methods

There are three types of descriptive methods:
1. **Observational**
  - Has two subtypes:
     - Naturalistic
     - Laboratory
2. **Case study** 
  - In-depth study of one or more individuals
3. **Survey**
  - Subjects are questioned

There are two methods to predict the relationship between two variables:
1. Correlational method
  - Positive relationship
  - Negative relationship
2. Quasi-experimental method
  - 


