---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-02-06"
lecture nr: [3]
course: Methods
title: "Chapter 3: Modules 5 and 6"
slug: "methods-2"
---

<details>
<summary>Course details</summary>

Professors:
- Meike de Boer
- Robert Prettner

Course form:
- Lectures on Monday and Tuesday (15:30 — 17:15)
- Question hour every Friday (11:00 — 12:00)
- Assignments in week 4,5 and 6

Course material:
- Jackson, S.L. Research methods: a modular approach (third edition).
  - [Second edition](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf)

The exam cosisits of 40 multiple choice questions and lasts 90 minutes.

See also:
- [Course manual — Methods](/text-mining/methods/CourseManualMethods.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 1](/text-mining/methods/Lecture1.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 2](/text-mining/methods/Lecture2.pdf)

</details>


## Module 5: Defining, Measuring, and Manipulating Variables

### Operational definition

Operationalize a research question

### Levels of Measurements



## Module 6: Reliability and validity

Reliability and validity are two key concepts in the Methods course.

- Reliability refers to observations or scores. Validity refers to conclusions based on observations.
- Reliability concerns random measurement error. Validity refers to systematic error (e.g. poor study design or wrong statistical method)

For example, Peter scores higher than Matt on IQ-test
- Reliability question: how sure are we that their true scores are different?
- Validity question: how sure are we that Peter is more intelligent than Matt?

## Reliability

Reliability and random error: the extent to which observations are affected by systematic error influences the validity of the conclusions. (The lesser the extent of systematic error the more valid the conclusions.)

Reliability is a neccesary, but not sufficient, condition for validity. In other words: highly reliable observations do not entail valid conclusions.

The smaller the random error the higher the reliability.

Reliability of 80% or 0.8 means that 80% of the observed values is true score variation and 20% is due to random measurement error.

Reliability = true score / (true score + error score)

Reliable = few random measurement errors

### Four types of reliability



## Validity



### Four types of validity


## Causality

When can we draw causal connections between events or variables?

Causal interpretations are logically weak. There are always external explanations for the relationship between two variables. That's why correlationsal studies and quasi-experiments are logically weak in determining causality: they lack control of alternatives.

Under what circumstances is a causal interpretation plausible?

1. Temporal order
2. There must be a statistical association
3. The association between the variables must not be a spurious relation
   - Relation can't be attributed to another factor
   - Third variable problem 

### 1. Temporal order/directionality

> The cause must happen before the effect.

This is not enough reason in itself, for example:
- The economy started blooming after the new president got office.
- Polar caps started to melt after women got a right to vote.

This fallacy is called 'post hoc ergo propter hoc' ("thereafter, thus therefore.")

### 2. Statistical assocation

> Change in causal variable in systematically assocatied with change in effect variable.

Correlation coefficient measures the strength of a linear relationship. The general symbol for correlation is `r`:

- Perfect positive correlation: 1
- Perfect negative correlation: -1
- No linear relationship: 0

### 3. Not spurious



