---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-02-21"
lecture nr: [6]
course: Methods
title: "Lecture 6 — Introduction to statistics I"
slug: "methods-6"
---

Chapter 7: 

- [Module 15](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf#page293R_mcid0) (excluding calculations and formulas)
- [Module 16](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf#page293R_mcid0) (not: pp. 247-254).
<details>
<summary>Course details</summary>

Professors:
- Meike de Boer
- Robert Prettner

Course form:
- Lectures on Monday and Tuesday (15:30 — 17:15)
- Question hour every Friday (11:00 — 12:00)
- Assignments in week 4,5 and 6

Course material:
- Jackson, S.L. Research methods: a modular approach (third edition).
  - [Second edition](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf)

The exam cosisits of 40 multiple choice questions and lasts 90 minutes.

See also:
- [Course manual — Methods](/text-mining/methods/CourseManualMethods.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 1](/text-mining/methods/Lecture1.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 2](/text-mining/methods/Lecture2.pdf)

</details>

## Assignment three

Renkema and Hoeken researched the effect of negative news on corporate image.

Experiment:
- Neutral information
- Negative information

Three research questions:



## Validity

The book covers many types of validity. The assignments focuses on four types of validity. In the exam all types are covered.

**Validity**: extent to which the observations reflect what we want to measure.

Validity refers to conclusions based on observations. 

How have methodological choices affected the results of measurement and therefore the conclusions that are drawn?

### Validity and Reliability

These two terms are sometimes confused.

Sample size has to do with validity, not reliability, because the issue is in the design/methodology. 

In quantitative research reliability is a *necessary*, but not *sufficient*, condition for validity.

In qualitative research, reliability is interpreted differently. For example, in case-study qualitative research, the study can't be reproduced.

### Four types of validity

#### 1. Face validity

Does the operationalization appear to be valid on it's surface? Face value. How does it appear?

#### 2. Conclusion validity

Do the observations allow for the conslusion that variables are related?

Whether or not we believe that variables are related. Are conclusions based on statistical tests justified?

#### 3. Internal validity

Associated with causality. Does the operationalization allow for the conclusions that variables are causally related?

Are there alternative explanations? Are causal conlusions justified?

For example:

- When ice cream advertisements lead to 25% percent increases in sales starting in May, an alternative explanation for the increase is the fact that it's summer.
- More churches in a city is associated with more crime. However, there's no causal connection as there's a third variable in play: population size.

Internal logic of study.

#### 4. External validity

How can we extrapolate:

- From our study's circumstances to natural circumstances?
- From our sample to population?

## Introduction to statistics

Range of techniques for:

- Analyzing
- Interpreting
- Displaying
- Making decisions 

Based on data. ([onlinestatbook.com](https://onlinestatbook.com))

It's not just about math. It's about a method of thinking about the world. So focus on understanding what the statistical techniques are, how they work and what we can do with them. See course manual.

### Critical thinking

Statistics includes critical thinking about:

- Where the numbers come from

### Descriptive statistics

Descriptive statistics (in the mass noun sense) is the process of using and analysing those statistics

#### Descriptive versus inferential statistics

Descriptive statistics describe a distribution.

Inferential statistics is a set of techniques that help us generalize from the sample we've observed to the population. It helps us infer conclusions regarding the population based on sample data. 

Two forms of inferential statistics:

1. Hypothesis testing: what conclusions do the data permit considering statistical hypotheses about the population?
    -  
2. Estimation: what do the data suggest about plausible values in the population?

- *t value*: used in inferential statistics.
- *p value*: used in inferential statistics.

##### Frequencies, proportions and percentages

There are absolute and relative frequencies:

- Relative: proportions and/or percentages.
- Absolute: the actual numbers.

Be careful when interpreting percentages; don't forget absolute numbers.

#### Normal distribution

Bell curve. Histogram. 

Deviations from 'normality' influence inferential procedures (T-tests etc.); many of these procedures assume normality one way or another.

Descriptive: with high levels of skewness, the mean doesn't represent the typical score.

When the sample size is small, there may be deviations from the normal distribution in the sample size event though the population has a normal distribution.

##### Skewness

- Positive has a longer tail towards the higher values
- Negative has a longer tail towards the lower values

#### Kurtosis

- Positive: the amount of extreme observations is higher than the ND.
- Negative: the amount of extreme observations is lower than the ND. Observations in the tails of the distributions occur less frquently than in the ND.

Note: book is incorrect on this (it incorrectly labels distributions with kurtosis as normal distributions). 

#### Measures of Central Tendency

A number that characterizes the 'middleness' of an entire distribution. Or conceptually, a measure that characterizes a 'typical' score.

Most frequently used:
- **Mode**: the most frequent score. Count frequency of every score, the score with the highest frequency is the mode.
- **Median**: the middle score. Order all scores, the middle score is the median.
- **Mean**: the average score. Add all scores, the sum divided by the number of values is the mean.

##### Mean

- Highly influenced by outliers

##### Median

- 

##### Mode

- 

#### Measures of Variation


