---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-03-13"
lecture nr: [9]
course: Methods
title: "Lecture 9"
slug: "methods-9"
---

## Quasi-experiments

Generally there's a lack of control over confounders. Without control over confounders, it's hard to impossible to make claims regarding causation.

Threats to internal validity

## Experimental method



## Threats to internal validity

- Module 12 in book

The general question is: is the manipulation of the independent variable or a confounder the cause of the effect on the dependent variable?

Effect is difference between control group and experimental group or pre-test and post-test?

The threats are:
- Nonequivalent control group: problem in subject selection and/or assignment can lead to differences between control and experimental groups.
- History effect: there may be an outside effect between pre- and posttest. Think about environmental effects on health studies.
- Maturation effect: the changes in the dependent variable may be due to subjects growing older during the course of the study.
- Testing effect: subjects may get better/worse in a particular test as they have repeatedly taken it over time. 
- Regression to the mean: (see module 10 p. 152) 
- Instrumentation: changes in the dependent variable may be due to changes in the measuring device.
- Mortality (attrition): Differential attrition/dropout between experimental and dropout groups may lead to inequality between groups.
- Diffusion of treatment: Changes in measured behaviour/responses may be due to information subjects have shared between groups.
- Experimenter and subjects effects: 
- Floor and ceiling effects: the measuring instrument used is not sensitive enough to detect differences at the low or high end of the scale.

## Threats to external validity

- Population validity: Do the 
- Ecological validity: Does the setting of the lab/experiment generalize to the general context of the measured value.

## Experimental design

- Factorial design
  - 2x3 = 2 independent variables, 1 with 2 conditions, 1 with 3
  - 3x4 = 2 independent variables, 1 with 3 conditions, 1 with 4
  - 
- In-between

### Single message designs (m = 1)

Many experimental studies in communication manipulate only 1 message. Results lead to general conclusions about the effect of (see slides).

If you make a single edit in a text, for example omit a conlcusion. You manipulate multiple variables e.g.:
- Text length
- Whether it contains a conclusion
- Repetition of certain keywords

If you use the unedited and edited text to make a claim about whether a text without conclusion is more persuasive (because readers reach the conclusions themselves), you aren't properly isolating variables

## Assignment 3

The T-test is used to 'check' whether the means of the control and experiment population are equal. Not the control and experiment samples.

Larger [explained variance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explained_variation) indicates a larger effect of the manipulation.

p-value: 

The p-value is the probability of achieving the t-value calculated, expressed as a fraction.
