---
speaker: Gerben Mulder
date: "2023-02-27"
lecture nr: [7]
course: Methods
title: "Lecture 7 — Introduction to statistics II"
slug: "methods-7"
---

Chapter 7: 

- [Module 15](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf#page293R_mcid0) (excluding calculations and formulas)
- [Module 16](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf#page293R_mcid0) (not: pp. 247-254).
<details>
<summary>Course details</summary>

Professors:
- Meike de Boer
- Robert Prettner

Course form:
- Lectures on Monday and Tuesday (15:30 — 17:15)
- Question hour every Friday (11:00 — 12:00)
- Assignments in week 4,5 and 6

Course material:
- Jackson, S.L. Research methods: a modular approach (third edition).
  - [Second edition](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf)

The exam cosisits of 40 multiple choice questions and lasts 90 minutes.

See also:
- [Course manual — Methods](/text-mining/methods/CourseManualMethods.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 1](/text-mining/methods/Lecture1.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 2](/text-mining/methods/Lecture2.pdf)

</details>

## Measure of variation

- **Range**: difference between lowest and highest score.
- **Standard deviation**: Square root of the average squared deviation from the mean. (Or typical deviation from the mean.)
- **Variance**: Average squared deviation from the mean.

> What makes SD a preferred measure of variation ovre variance?

When the standard deviation (or 'spread') is higher, the mean is less representative of the data (i.e. individual observations). 

### Significant differences

What difference in mean and variation account for a statistically significant difference? 

There's always one alternative explanation (all-chance): the difference is due to the sample. The sample is randomly selected and the difference between the two measured values is solely due to chance. 

The hypothesis that the measured difference is due to chance is called null-hypothesis. Null-hypothesis is always a hypothesis of 0:
- Zero difference 
- Zero correlation
- etc.

The null-hypothesis is rejected when the p value is smaller than alpha (significance level). Alpha is usually 0.05 (or 5%).

The **p value** expresses the chance that the measured difference is based on a population without differences. If p = .001, there's a 0.1% chance that the data found is:
- Due to chance
- Not representative of the population

Sample statistics are estimates of population values. Sample means form estimates of population means. 

**t value** is the (measured difference - null-hypothesis) / standard measurement error.

The standard measurement error indicates the spread between measured values.

So if the t value is high, the measured differene is high in relationship to the variation between measured values. If the t value is high, the results are likely to be statistically significant, I believe.
