---
speaker: Meike de Boer
date: "2023-02-20"
lecture nr: [5]
course: Methods
title: "Lecture 5"
slug: "methods-5"
---

<details>
<summary>Course details</summary>

Professors:
- Meike de Boer
- Robert Prettner

Course form:
- Lectures on Monday and Tuesday (15:30 — 17:15)
- Question hour every Friday (11:00 — 12:00)
- Assignments in week 4,5 and 6

Course material:
- Jackson, S.L. Research methods: a modular approach (third edition).
  - [Second edition](/text-mining/methods/Jackson-Research-Methods-second-edition.pdf)

The exam cosisits of 40 multiple choice questions and lasts 90 minutes.

See also:
- [Course manual — Methods](/text-mining/methods/CourseManualMethods.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 1](/text-mining/methods/Lecture1.pdf)
- [Slides lecture 2](/text-mining/methods/Lecture2.pdf)

</details>

## Survey research

Advantages:

- Possible to use large samples

Disadvantages:

- Low validity
  - Complex concepts are operationalized into a few simple survey items. Unique opinions can't be mapped to less-granular questionairre scores.

### Sampling design

- Goal is to lower bias of estimates
- The estimate is unbiased in that its expected value over all possible samples that might be selected with the design equals the actual population value.
  
#### Probability sampling

Sampling technique. Each member of population has a probability of being selected

#### Random sampling

Random selection. 

#### Stratified sampling

Designed to ensure subgroups are fairly represented.

1. Divide population in strata/subgroups
2. Use random sampling in each subgroup

For example, a population consists of 100 people: 90 women and 10 men. The sample size is 10. The population is first divided into strata (women/men), then within each strata, every person in the population has a 10% chance of being selected. This avoids under/over-representation due to chance in random selection.

#### Cluster sampling

People are grouped, for example based on address. Then people are selected in batch.

#### Nonprobability sampling

A sampling technique in which individual members of the populations don't have equal chance of being selected.

There are two subtypes:

##### Convenience sampling

Subjects are obtained whenever they van be found and typically wherever it is conventient for the researcher

##### Quota sampling

Ensure the sample is like the population on certain characteristics but uses convenience sampling to obtain participants. It's like stratified sampling without the random sampling within the subgroup.

### Think of a design

**Population**: 

## Predictive methods

Causal interpretations are logically weak.

### Correlational research

Correlation: change with one variable is associated with change in another variable.

**r** is used to express a *linear* relation between two variables.

A single dataset can consist of subgroups. If the data is distributed over subgroups, there may be strong(er) correlations.

- .7-1 Strong
- 0.3-0.69 Moderate
- 0-0.29 None to weak

### Reliability of your constructs

What is reliable 
